---
path: "/posts/hi"
date: 2018-03-06T23:00:08.060Z
title: "Hi! (again?)"
tags: ['gatsbyjs', 'typescript', 'javascript', 'webdev']
excerpt: "Hej, hello, こんにちは."
---

I don't know how many times I've started and restarted this blog, probably three-four times now? It's not only caused by me being unable to actually committ to something, the thing is that for a really long time I've been using the act of rebuilding my blog as a chance to try out new technologies and play around (instead of actually writing content that any one can read). 

`mattias.rocks` was a jekyll blog for a short while, then I moved over to ghost, then to a hacked-together metalsmith thing and then two or three other versions that no one else but me got to see. 

And now we're here, a new blog again, this time built with the help of Gatsbyjs. It isn't looking like much yet but I'll keep hacking on it little by little, with the difference from before being that I'll really try to create some content this time around. Starting with this short profile of myself:

My name is Mattias Wikström, I'm 30 years old and I live in northern Sweden with my wife. My wife is from Tokyo, where I lived for a few years about 10 years ago. I am a web developer working at Ephox, building TinyMCE. I am a long distance runner, currently training for the Stockholm Marathon that happens in about three months.

On `mattias.rocks` I plan to write about what I'm thinking about - so mostly web development stuff and marathon race training, I guess. 

Who would actually want to read this, I'm not sure. We'll see what happens. 